C# 7.x: Patterns (#61)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/statements.md

    ;

switch_label
    : 'case' pattern case_guard?  ':'
    | 'default' ':'
    ;
    
case_guard
    : 'when' expression
    ;
```

A *switch_statement* consists of the keyword `switch`, followed by a parenthesized expression (called the ***switch expression***), followed by a *switch_block*. The *switch_block* consists of zero or more *switch_section*s, enclosed in braces. Each *switch_section* consists of one or more *switch_label*s followed by a *statement_list* ([§13.3.2](statements.md#1332-statement-lists)). Each *switch_label* containing `case` has an associated pattern (§patterns-new-clause) against which the value of the switch expression is tested. If *case-guard* is present, its expression shall be of type `bool` and that expression is evaluated as an additional condition to be satisfied for the case to be considered satisfied.

> A compile-time error occurs if two or more case labels in the same switch statement specify the same pattern and case guard.

Reviewer: This is not correct.  The constraint only applies to case labels that are unguarded.

```csharp
int i = 12;
switch (i)
{
    case 1 when "".Length == 0:
        break;
    case 1 when "".Length == 0: // OK
        break;
}
```

Reviewer 2: @gafter Ouch. What is the reason for this being OK? (I can think of some, not sure any are “good” ATM)

Reviewer: We don't have a concept of case guards being "the same".  For that matter, we don't have a concept of patterns being "the same".

We don't evaluate what the case guard does or assume it is idempotent.  For all we know it rolls dice.

What we do have is an error if a case is unreachable because it is subsumed by previous (unguarded) cases.  That needs to be described.

Related to that, we require that a switch expression is exhaustive.  But switch expressions come later.

There can be at most one `default` label in a `switch` statement.

A `switch` statement is executed as follows:

> - The switch expression is evaluated.

Reviewer: After the switch expression is evaluated, we determine if there was a governing type according to the previous language rules, and if so convert to that type.

> - The lexically first pattern in the set of `case` labels in the same `switch` statement that matches the value of the switch expression, causes control to be transferred to the statement list following the matched `case` label.

Reviewer: ...for which the guard expression, if one is present, evaluates to true...

> - The lexically first pattern in the set of `case` labels in the same `switch` statement that tests equal to the value of the switch expression, causes control isto be transferred to the statement list following the matched `case` label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The lexically first pattern in the set of `case` labels in the same `switch` statement that matches the value of the switch expression, causes control to be transferred to the statement list following the matched `case` label.
```

> - If none of the patterns specified in `case` labels in the same `switch` statement tests equal to the value of the switch expression, and if a `default` label is present, control is transferred to the statement list following the `default` label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If none of the patterns specified in `case` labels in the same `switch` statement matches the value of the switch expression, and if a `default` label is present, control is transferred to the statement list following the `default` label.
```

> - If none of the patterns specified in `case` labels in the same `switch` statement tests equal to the value of the switch expression, and if no `default` label is present, control is transferred to the end point of the `switch` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If none of the patterns specified in `case` labels in the same `switch` statement matches the value of the switch expression, and if no `default` label is present, control is transferred to the end point of the `switch` statement.
```

    ;

switch_label
    : 'case' pattern case_guard?  ':'
    | 'default' ':'
    ;
    
case_guard
    : 'when' expression
    ;
```

> A *switch_statement* consists of the keyword `switch`, followed by a parenthesized expression (called the ***switch expression***), followed by a *switch_block*. The *switch_block* consists of zero or more *switch_section*s, enclosed in braces. Each *switch_section* consists of one or more *switch_label*s followed by a *statement_list* ([§12.3.2](statements.md#1232-statement-lists)). Each *switch_label* containing `case` has an associated pattern (§patterns-new-clause) against which the value of the switch expression is tested. If *case-guard* is present, its expression shall be of type `bool` and that expression is evaluated as an additional condition to be satisfied for the case to be considered satisfied.

Reviewer: We will have to rename ***switch expression*** to something else, because we will have a language construct by that name upcoming.  Or we can do it then.

> A compile-time error occurs if two or more case labels in the same switch statement specify the same pattern and case guard.

Reviewer: It is an error if a case is unreachable because it is subsumed by previous (unguarded) cases. That still needs to be described.  It is probably easy now, before recursive patterns are introduced.

> ```
> *end note*

The *statement_list*s of a *switch_block* may contain declaration statements ([§13.6](statements.md#136-declaration-statements)). The scope of a local variable or constant declared in a switch block is the switch block.

Within a switch block, the meaning of a name used in an expression context shall always be the same ([§12.7.3.2](expressions.md#12732-invariant-meaning-in-blocks)).

The statement list of a given switch section is reachable if the `switch` statement is reachable and at least one of the following is true:

> - The switch expression value matches a `case` label in the switch section.

Reviewer: This is wrong... no, it isn't even wrong.  It is trying to define a compile-time property (statement list of a given switch section is reachable) based on a runtime property (the switch expression value matches a `case` label in the switch section).

Author: More work needed.

Author: @gafter I think I see my mistake. Here's the whole bullet list with the bits **I deleted** struck-through:

> The statement list of a given switch section is reachable if the `switch` statement is reachable and at least one of the following is true:
> - <del>The switch expression is a non-constant value.</del>
> - The switch expression <del>is a constant</del> value <del>that</del> matches a `case` label in the switch section.
> - The switch expression <del>is a constant</del> value <del>that</del> doesn't match any `case` label, and the switch section contains the `default` label.
> - A switch label of the switch section is referenced by a reachable `goto case` or `goto default` statement.

If I restore the deletions of the 2nd and 3rd bullet items, we're only talking about a constant value matching a *constant_pattern*, and that can be done at compile-time, right?

I'm thinking I should also restore the 1st bullet item, no?

Reviewer: I don't think that's right.  I think you've defined "matches" as something that is determined at run-time, not at compile-time.  But reachability is a compile-time concept.

Reviewer: But yes, for the purpose of the semantics of a switch statement, we do compute statically some things based on the value of the case constant patterns, and the constant value of the switch expression if it happens to be a constant.  For example, if the switch expression is a constant 3, we know it doesn't match `case 4` and that switch block's statements are considered unreachable.

**There are two concepts of reachability in play here**.  One is about the reachability of the statements in a switch block.  The other is about the reachability of a switch case; we use the term "subsumed" to say that a pattern cannot be matched because of previous patterns.  And we can have any combination of the values of these two kinds of reachabilities.  The value of a switch expression, if it happens to be a constant, is used to affect the meaning of statement reachability but not subsumption.  For example, if you switch on the constant value `3`, you are allowed to have `case 4`, but it doesn't lead to the reachability of the statements in that switch block.

A switch case that is subsumed by the totality of the previous switch cases (that do not have a where clause) results in an error.  [See here](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTAjAWAFBQMwAJboMLoN7LpGYZQAs6AsgBQCU+hxTA9gEYBWApgMYAu6zdAF50qANyMmRAM4B3AJa9uAC3TVm9Akik703AIbTO6eQDt+ADxCTdO1gCdO+gNYTtt4gaOjr7j1MoYOjF0AHpQ9ABXU0d9FX1WABtOG38iBydXVOIAXxs8vxJMCkC6fAKcoA==).
A statement (in a switch block or elsewhere) that is not reachable results in a warning.

The statements in a switch block that contains a default label may not be reachable if all of the values of the switch expression are handled in previous switch blocks.  See [this example](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTAjAWAFBQMwAJboMLoN7LpGYZQAs6AsgBQCU+hxTAlgHYAu6A9ugLzqoA3IyZEAzgHdm7AMYALdNS70CSUevQyAhmICm6NpwAeIERvUAjAE66tAa2FrzxYLoBmWgK4AbdqafOopQwdILoAPTh6J6sNlryWhbeumaBRNa2DqnEAL5meQEkmBTBdPgFOUA==).

A switch case is unreachable if its pattern is subsumed by the totality of switch labels (that do not have when clauses) appearing before it in the switch.  For example, if you switch on an expression of type `byte`, and have a switch block to handle each possible value of a byte, then a following `case var _:` would be subsumed (all of the values of byte are already handles) and would result in an error.  However, a `default` label is OK (but would not lead to statements in the switch block being reachable).

The concept of subsumption is completely missing from this revision.  The [draft for this feature](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-7.0/pattern-matching.md#switch-statement) says:

> It is an error if a _switch_label_ can have no effect at runtime because its pattern is subsumed by previous cases. [TODO: We should be more precise about the techniques the compiler is required to use to reach this judgment.]

I will require some work to introduce and describe this concept fully.  Breaking patterns into their own chapter may make it a tiny bit easier.

- The `switch` statement is reachable, the switch expression is a non-constant value, and no `default` label is present.
- The `switch` statement is reachable, the switch expression is a constant value that doesn't match any `case` label, and no `default` label is present.

If a `case` label is unreachable, a compile-time occurs. (However, it is *not* a compile-time error for a `default` label to be unreachable).
> *Example*:
> ```csharp
> switch (shape)
> {
>     …
>     case var x:
>         …
>     case var _: // error: unreachable, as previous case always matches
>         …
>     default:
>          …     // no error: unreachable, but permitted
> }
> ```
> *end example*

> A pattern variable declared in a *switch_label* is definitely assigned ([§10.4](variables.md#104-definite-assignment)) in its case block if and only if that case block contains precisely one *switch_label*.

Reviewer: Probably something needs to be added to the section on definite assignment.

Within a switch block, the meaning of a name used in an expression context shall always be the same ([§11.7.4](expressions.md#1174-simple-names)).

The statement list of a given switch section is reachable if the `switch` statement is reachable and at least one of the following is true:

- The switch expression value matches a `case` label in the switch section.
- The switch expression value doesn't match any `case` label, and the switch section contains the `default` label.
- A switch label of the switch section is referenced by a reachable `goto case` or `goto default` statement.

The end point of a `switch` statement is reachable if at least one of the following is true:

- The `switch` statement contains a reachable `break` statement that exits the `switch` statement.
- The `switch` statement is reachable, the switch expression is a non-constant value, and no `default` label is present.
- The `switch` statement is reachable, the switch expression is a constant value that doesn’t match any `case` label, and no `default` label is present.

> If a `case` label is unreachable, a compile-time occurs. (However, it is *not* a compile-time error for a `default` label to be unreachable).

Reviewer: We need rules to be given for a `case` label to be reachable or unreachable.  We will need something saying that it is an error if a case pattern is subsumed by previous patterns.  See [HERE](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTABAQQLACgDeq5blALHAWQAoAjAezIBs4BDAGjnKsYEpNsMVtu4BnAdwCWAFwDGACzhF6rOJx4K4omrwCmU4QCcArqoYB9FiHaLFJTapoBrANwnTSleqL6GW3UfsPs5y7a+KympSAGY0lGoMYRGqnlzePL7WdvHeQc6ucIYgcAD0uXCqmppkmjkAKuLqAiISjsGCvHDaAHYWNBI0JJSqAd5J/qk8AL72oyjjQA).  The behavior of this must be specified.  I'm afraid the margin here is too small to contain the specification.

Reviewer: It is also worth saying "The order in which patterns are matched is not defined. A compiler is permitted to match patterns out of order, and to reuse the results of already matched patterns to compute the result of matching of other patterns."

Although this fact may not be observable in C# 7 except by inspecting the generated code or measuring performance, it will have real semantic consequences in future versions.  This is worth adding today so it doesn't get lost.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, matching in any order with non-idempotent patterns... here be dragons! Can we change Rosyln so the order of evaluation is randomised on compile? :-)

Reviewer: When we get to nested patterns, it will be recommended that properties tested in patterns be idempotent.

Reviewer: Actually, there is a policy in the compiler team that we will avoid changing the order in which subpatterns are matched from one revision to another absent very good reasons.

> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

The *statement_list*s of a *switch_block* may contain declaration statements ([§12.6](statements.md#126-declaration-statements)). The scope of a local variable or constant declared in a switch block is the switch block.

Within a switch block, the meaning of a name used in an expression context shall always be the same ([§11.7.4](expressions.md#1174-simple-names)).

The statement list of a given switch section is reachable if the `switch` statement is reachable and at least one of the following is true:

- The switch expression value matches a `case` label in the switch section.
- The switch expression value doesn't match any `case` label, and the switch section contains the `default` label.
- A switch label of the switch section is referenced by a reachable `goto case` or `goto default` statement.

The end point of a `switch` statement is reachable if at least one of the following is true:

- The `switch` statement contains a reachable `break` statement that exits the `switch` statement.

> - The `switch` statement is reachable, the switch expression is a non-constant value, and no `default` label is present.

Reviewer: This list isn't correct for several reasons:
- It only describes the behavior of constant labels.  What about `case int x:`?  `case var _:`?
- It isn't even correct for constant values.  If you switch on a value of type `byte`, and have cases to handle all values, a `default:` label does not lead to the reachability of its switch section.

- The `switch` statement is reachable, the switch expression is a constant value that doesn’t match any `case` label, and no `default` label is present.

> If a `case` label is unreachable, a compile-time occurs. (However, it is *not* a compile-time error for a `default` label to be unreachable).

Reviewer: We have not defined a concept of a switch label being reachable.  This needs to be reworked based on the concept of subsumption, which is different from statement reachability.  Note that [THIS](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTAjAWAFBQMwAJboMLoN7LpGYZQAs6AsgBQCU+hxTAzgO4CWALgMYAW61VPQJImY4twCGzAKboyIRuOVUYdANzoA9FvQBXAHYAnGZL6SARgBsZSlWIsnJAa3V2mAXztfRxNJgpKNWEfDyA=) (constant switch expression and non-matching constant case) is permitted with only a warning.

> *Example*:
>
> ```csharp
> switch (shape)
> {
>     …
>     case var x:
>         …
>     case var _: // error: unreachable, as previous case always matches
>         …
>     default:
>          …     // no error: unreachable, but permitted
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

> A pattern variable declared in a *switch_label* is definitely assigned ([§9.4](variables.md#94-definite-assignment)) in its case block if and only if that case block contains precisely one *switch_label*.

Reviewer: I know I said that but... it isn't correct.  [Example 1](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTAjAWAFBQMwAJboMLoN7LpGYZQAs6AsgBQCU+hxTAzgO4CWALgMYAW61VPQJImY4twCGzAKbp2AO07oAHiEbimwGQDNJAVwA2nEOgD0Z9PoUAnGZL6SARoZkbN4yjGoraAbncPJic7SQBrANFNAF93WKiiNEwKL2pFZV98ePigA===).  [Example 2](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTAjAWAFBQMwAJboMLoN7LpGYZQAs6AsgBQCU+hxTAzgO4CWALgMYAW61VPQJImY4twCGzAKboyIdAHol6AK4A7AE4zJfSQCMANnINrO6DQHsLzNQbsBbGcEbimU2enYaLADxA3d3FKGGo/WgBuIOCmAx1JAGto0XcAXyCM1KI0TApQ6h9/YSysoA==).

A correct formulation requires we define both reachability and subsumption for switch labels.  Then, the rule is that the block must contain only one *reachable* switch label.

A default label is reachable if the set of switch cases are _**exhaustive**_.  The set of switch cases are exhaustive if a hypothetical switch case `case var _:` added at the end would not be subsumed.  Intuitively, that means that the set of switch cases might not handle all values.

> ```
> a `goto` statement is used to transfer control out of a nested scope. *end note*

> The target of a `goto case` statement is the statement list in the immediately enclosing `switch` statement ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)) which contains a `case` label with the given *constant_pattern*. If the `goto case` statement is not enclosed by a `switch` statement or if the nearest enclosing `switch` statement does not contain a `case` label with the given *constant_pattern*, a compile-time error occurs.

Reviewer: With the given *constant_pattern*?  Do we have a concept of when two constant patterns are the same?

Reviewer: There is also a requirement that the target case label must not have a `when` clause.

Author: I'll take a look.

Author: @gafter Re your Q, "Do we have a concept of when two constant patterns are the same?" In the new section "Constant patterns," we have the following: "Given a pattern input value *e* and a *constant_expression* *c*, if *e* and *c* have integral types, the pattern is considered matched if the result of the expression `e == c` is `true`. Otherwise, the pattern is considered matched if `object.Equals(e, c)` returns `true`. In this case it is a compile-time error if the static type of *e* is not pattern compatible (§declaration-pattern-new-clause) with the type of the constant." Does that address your concern?

In the context of a switch, `goto case 0;`, `goto case 10 - 10;`, and `goto case 5 + 2 - 7;` all match `case 0:`.

Author: @gafter  Re your comment, "There is also a requirement that the target case label must not have a when clause.", I have confirmed that. Given the case label `case 10 when flag == true:`, `goto case 10;` results in CS0159 "No such label 'case 10' within the scope of the goto statement."

I propose adding the following:
> It is a compile-time error for *constant_pattern* to target a *switch_label* containing a *case_guard*.

Reviewer: No, that doesn't quite do it.  The text "The target of a `goto case` statement is the statement list in the immediately enclosing `switch` statement ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)) which contains a `case` label with the given *constant_pattern*." needs to be modified, because there may be more than one such target.

```csharp
int i = 12;
switch (i)
{
    case 1 when "".Length == 0:
        break;
    case 1:
        break;
    case 2:
        goto case 1;
}
```

>
> *end note*

> The target of a `goto case` statement is the statement list in the immediately enclosing `switch` statement ([§12.8.3](statements.md#1283-the-switch-statement)) which contains a `case` label with the given *constant_pattern*. If the `goto case` statement is not enclosed by a `switch` statement or if the nearest enclosing `switch` statement does not contain a `case` label with the given *constant_pattern*, a compile-time error occurs.

Reviewer: Need to add `without a when clause` twice to this paragraph.

The target of a `goto default` statement is the statement list in the immediately enclosing `switch` statement ([§12.8.3](statements.md#1283-the-switch-statement)), which contains a `default` label. If the `goto default` statement is not enclosed by a `switch` statement, or if the nearest enclosing `switch` statement does not contain a `default` label, a compile-time error occurs.

> It is a compile-time error for *constant_pattern* to target a *switch_label* containing a *case_guard*.

Reviewer: This isn't right.  We need to define the target of the goto case so that it never matches one with a case guard.  See [this example](https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgTAjAWAFBQMwAJboMLoN7LpGYZQAs6AsgBQCU+hxTAzgO4CWALgMYAW61VPQJImY4twCGzAKboMrXjIB26AGaSANrJCNx+9AG50AehPoArsoBOMyX0kAjTTL0H0U2fPSKV6rTpu7sTGZpY2dg7OrqLBHtJyqLqxwcAyGhaanMlxYgDmAPacBfFeqIZBxAC+bjUpJJgUlDDU7Mqc6AAewnV1QA==).
